Cambridge University Press
0521667682 - The Complete Capuchin: The Biology of the Genus Cebus - Dorothy M. Fragaszy, Elisabetta
Visalberghi and Linda Marie Fedigan
Frontmatter
More information

The Complete Capuchin
Capuchin monkeys are one of the most widely distributed genera
of primates in Central and South America. Capuchins captivate
the imagination of scientists and the lay public alike with their
creative and highly variable behavior, their grace and power in
action, and their highly developed social character. In this, the
first scholarly book devoted to the biology of the genus Cebus
(Primates: Platyrrhine), we summarize the taxonomy, distribution, life history, ecology, anatomy, development, perception,
cognition, motor skills, and social and sexual behavior of these
monkeys. The book also describes how humans have viewed,
used, and studied these monkeys from ancient times to the
present. The authors’ explicitly organismic and inclusive treatment provides a picture in unparalleled detail of the capuchin
over its lifetime for all those with an interest in these fascinating
animals.
D    M. F     is Professor of Psychology and
the Chair of the Neuroscience and Behavior Program at the
University of Georgia, where she teaches development, developmental psychobiology, and comparative cognition. She has
also co-edited The Biology of Traditions with Susan Perry (2003;
0 521 81597 5, hardback).
E        V         is Research Director at the Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie della Cognizione of the Consiglio
Nazionale delle Ricerche in Rome. She studies comparative
primate cognition and behavioral biology. Her research focuses
on capuchin monkeys.
L   M. F      is Professor of Anthropology and Canada
Research Chair at the University of Calgary. She teaches primatology, physical anthropology, and gender studies. Her research
interests include life histories of female monkeys, social relations
between the sexes, and conservation of neotropical primates.

© Cambridge University Press

www.cambridge.org

Cambridge University Press
0521667682 - The Complete Capuchin: The Biology of the Genus Cebus - Dorothy M. Fragaszy, Elisabetta
Visalberghi and Linda Marie Fedigan
Frontmatter
More information

The Complete Capuchin
The Biology of the Genus Cebus
Dorothy M. Fragaszy
Elisabetta Visalberghi
Linda Marie Fedigan

© Cambridge University Press

www.cambridge.org

Cambridge University Press
0521667682 - The Complete Capuchin: The Biology of the Genus Cebus - Dorothy M. Fragaszy, Elisabetta
Visalberghi and Linda Marie Fedigan
Frontmatter
More information

                                                   
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom
                      
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge, CB2 2RU, UK
40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011–4211, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
Ruiz de Alarcón 13, 28014 Madrid, Spain
Dock House, The Waterfront, Cape Town 8001, South Africa
http://www.cambridge.org

C D. Fragaszy, E. Visalberghi and L. Fedigan 2004

This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and
to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2004
Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge
Typeface Ehrhardt 9.5/12pt.

System LATEX 2ε []

A catalog record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 0 521 66116 1 hardback
ISBN 0 521 66768 2 paperback

© Cambridge University Press

www.cambridge.org

Cambridge University Press
0521667682 - The Complete Capuchin: The Biology of the Genus Cebus - Dorothy M. Fragaszy, Elisabetta
Visalberghi and Linda Marie Fedigan
Frontmatter
More information

For Rick, for everything – DF
For my parents Noela and Aldo, to Liz Bates an extraordinary friend, and
to the capuchins Cammello, Toko, Carlotta, Roberta, Gal . . . They all
taught me how to think. – EV
For John, helpmate and fellow naturalist – LF

© Cambridge University Press

www.cambridge.org

Cambridge University Press
0521667682 - The Complete Capuchin: The Biology of the Genus Cebus - Dorothy M. Fragaszy, Elisabetta
Visalberghi and Linda Marie Fedigan
Frontmatter
More information

Contents

Preface page ix
Acknowledgements

10 Fancy manipulators. Capuchins use objects
as tools 173

xi

11 Living together. Social interactions,
relationships and social structure 202

Prologue 1
PART I

CAPUCHINS IN NATURE

12 Erotic artists. Sexual behavior, forms of
courtship and mating 221

1 (With Anthony Rylands) Taxonomy, distribution
and conservation. Where and what are they and
how did they get there? 13

13 Learning together. Socially biased
learning 244

2 Behavioral ecology. How do capuchins make a
living? 36

Epilogue The (in)complete capuchin 260
Appendices

3 Community ecology. How do capuchins interact
with their local communities and influence their
environments? 55

I Plant foods eaten by capuchins 261
II Sites of long-term field observations of
capuchin monkeys listed in the
bibliography 286

4 Life history and demography 72
PART II BEHAVIORAL BIOLOGY

III

5 The body 83
6 Development 106
7 Motor skills 126

Blood biochemistry, hematological
and serum protein parameters for
males and females (a) and juveniles and
adults (b) 287

IV Literature resources on management of
captive capuchins 291

PART III BEHAVIORAL PSYCHOLOGY
8 Perceiving the world. Memory and
perception 143

References 293
Index 332

9 Engaging the world. Exploration and
problem-solving 157

vii

© Cambridge University Press

www.cambridge.org

Cambridge University Press
0521667682 - The Complete Capuchin: The Biology of the Genus Cebus - Dorothy M. Fragaszy, Elisabetta
Visalberghi and Linda Marie Fedigan
Frontmatter
More information

Preface

Do you like jigsaw puzzles? We do. We like to look at
the individual pieces, to appreciate the characteristics of
each piece and the similarities and differences in contour and color among pieces; then to try different ways of
aligning them with each other; ultimately to see emerging from our constructive efforts a coherent picture as
we succeed in putting the puzzle together. This has been
our approach in this book about capuchin monkeys. We
have the opportunity to do this now because information about capuchins has accumulated rapidly in the past
20 years.
We believe that we are in a transition period, where
capuchins are shifting from a little-known to a wellknown genus, but the knowledge at present is scattered
and therefore not readily accessible outside the small
community of “capuchinologists.” For many years, in
fact, we have been hampered in our efforts to educate
others about the genus with which we three work the
most at present because there is no general reference
volume about it. So, this book is for the many scientists
and personnel working where these monkeys occur naturally, and for our students, who so often have asked
“Is there a book about capuchins that would help me to
learn something about them?”. This innocent question
has always been disconcerting for us. We became tired
of replying, “Well, not really – but here is a collection of
articles touching on some features of their biology that
might interest you,” and handing them a sheaf of papers
the thickness of a substantial log. We finally responded
to this pebble in our shoes – it seems to have grown to
the size of a boulder – by taking on the task of writing
the reference volume ourselves.
Our usual strategy in beginning to solve a puzzle
is to begin with the easier parts, usually the boundaries or particularly distinctive sections. Once at least
some of these are relatively defined, we begin to piece in
more ambiguous elements. We have followed this general strategy in our exploration of the capuchin puzzle. We realize that we have described a puzzle that

we can only partially complete at this time (despite the
hubris of our title). There are still many pieces missing, and one can rearrange the pieces that we have provided to produce somewhat different pictures than we
have. There are omissions, of course, most notably of
physiological and disease-related topics, that reflect our
limitations. Nevertheless, we hope that this volume will
prove useful to students looking for a general picture
of capuchins in historical, geographic, physical, social,
ecological, experiential, and phylogenetic context. Our
intent was to write a book that would be accessible to the
person interested in learning about capuchin monkeys
but who is not necessarily a specialist trained in biology, psychology, or anthropology. We also wanted the
book to be useful to those with a professional interest in
these monkeys – that is, our colleagues in research and
education, those responsible for caring for capuchins
in captivity, those who work to conserve and manage
the monkeys and the forests where they occur in nature,
and those who answer the public’s questions about them.
Thus we have covered as broad a spectrum of subjects
as we felt knowledgeable to write about. We have, to the
best of our ability, presented capuchin monkeys from
an organismic perspective – that is, as whole individuals
participating in groups, and groups in ecosystems, and as
individuals with evolutionary, developmental, physical,
and experiential facets to their existence. This perspective is the source of our fascination with these monkeys, and we hope to convey this fascination to our
readers.
Unfortunately, deciding to write a book occurs on a
vastly different time scale than accomplishing that task.
In our case, we wanted the book to be a product of our
joint efforts, not simply a collection of pieces written
by three people. We wrote most of the book, literally,
together, over the course of three furiously productive
periods. We had the good fortune to spend these periods
at a serene spot facing the sandy shores of Peconic Bay, on
Long Island, in New York. The surroundings nurtured
ix

© Cambridge University Press

www.cambridge.org

Cambridge University Press
0521667682 - The Complete Capuchin: The Biology of the Genus Cebus - Dorothy M. Fragaszy, Elisabetta
Visalberghi and Linda Marie Fedigan
Frontmatter
More information

x

Preface

all manner of creative thought; long walks along shore
and through wood allowed us to set these thoughts in
order. For this good fortune we thank Russ and Carolyn
McCall, who generously lent us the Red House, and
the whole McCall family for their hospitality. We also
visited with Stephen Nash, whose art work graces this

© Cambridge University Press

book, and during these visits we were inspired by his
incomparable collection of images of primates. We also
thank Anthony Rylands for his invaluable collaboration
on Chapter 1 (taxonomy), a subject which he knows
deeply and we do not, and which we thought critical to
cover thoroughly in this book.

www.cambridge.org

Cambridge University Press
0521667682 - The Complete Capuchin: The Biology of the Genus Cebus - Dorothy M. Fragaszy, Elisabetta
Visalberghi and Linda Marie Fedigan
Frontmatter
More information

Acknowledgements

A project of this magnitude reflects the collaborative
efforts of many people, and this particular project is
no exception. We have many individuals to thank for
sharing the burdens of preparing this book. For providing photographs, we thank Jim Anderson, Sue Boinski,
Brian Grafton, Kathy Jack, Charles Janson, Katie
McKinnon, Russ Mittermeier, Briseida Resende,
Giovanna Spinozzi and Peter Strick. For providing images of published figures, we thank Brendan
McGonigle, Margaret Chalmers and Patrizia Potı̀. For
the cover photo, we thank Margherita Stammati. For
sharing unpublished data, including dissertations, we
thank Mary Baker, Dave Bergeson, Sue Boinski, Sarah
Brosnan, John Buckley, Sarah Cummins-Sebree, Mario
Di Bitetti, Carolyn Hall, Patricia Izar, Katherine Jack,
Katrina Landau, Katie MacKinnon, Lynne Miller,
Betsy Mitchell, Carlos Nagle, Robert O’Malley, Melissa
Panger, Susan Perry, Lisa Rose and Kym Snarr. For
informing us about the collection of radiographs of
capuchins followed longitudinally through development, we thank John Fleagle. For helping us to locate
old prints, we thank Gustl Anzenberger. For commenting in conversation on various aspects of the work, we
thank Gustl Anzenberger, Sue Boinski, Mario Di Bitetti,
Andrea Hohman, Charles Janson, Susan Perry, John
Robinson and Lisa Rose.
For reading and commenting on drafts of chapters, we thank Leah Adams-Curtis, John Addicott,
Elsa Addessi, Jim Anderson, Pamela Asquith, Sue
Boinski, Karly Branch, Sarah Carnegie, Monica Carosi,
Colin Chapman, Marianne Christel, Sarah CumminsSebree, Thomas Defler, Maud Drapier, Erin Ehmke,
Cam Fielding, Joan Fragaszy, Spartaco Gippoliti,
Katherine Jack, Larry Jacobsen, Gram Jones (who
merits a special thanks from DF for much help
with the finer points of comparative morphology),
Katie Leighty, Jessica Lynch, Katie MacKinnon, Carlotta Maggio, Rob O’Malley, Lauren McCall, Floriano
Papi, Susan Perry, Patrizia Potı̀, Carrie Rosengart,
Anthony Rylands, Giovanna Spinozzi, Karen Strier,
Roger Thomas, Ari Vreemzaal, Anne Weaver and Toni
Ziegler.

For helping with references, tables, figures, appendices and assisting with other editorial work, we thank
Elsa Addessi, Gustl Anzenberger, Karly Branch, Sarah
Carnegie, Sarah Cummins-Sebree, Amy Fuller, Alison
Grand, Erica Hoy, Katie Leighty, Stefano Marta,
Carlotta Maggio, John McCall, Deborah Nicol, Andy
de Paoli, Carrie Rosengart, Louise Seagraves, Michelle
Tremblay and Amy Venable.
The distribution maps in Chapter 1 were kindly
drawn by Kimberly Meek, Publications Department,
and the base maps were prepared by Mark Denil of the
Conservation Mapping Program in the GIS and Mapping Laboratory, at the Center for Applied Biodiversity
Science, Conservation International, Washington, DC.
We would like to acknowledge the use of the Primate
Information Network (PIN), an information resource
maintained jointly by the Washington and Wisconsin
Regional Primate Research Centers and the Libraries
of the University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin,
USA. In particular, we made extensive use of the Primate Lit database maintained by the PIN to prepare our
bibliography and to search the literature.
Many of the drawings in this book, including the
color plates, were prepared by Stephen Nash, to whom
we offer a very special, deep thanks for generous help
and enduring enthusiasm.
DMF acknowledges financial support for research
with capuchins from the National Science Foundation
and the National Institutes of Health, USA, and the
LSB Leakey Foundation. EV acknowledges financial
support from the Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche,
Italy. LMF acknowledges 20 years of continuous support for capuchin research from the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).
She also thanks the Canada Research Chairs Program
for financial support.
Finally, we thank our first editor at Cambridge University Press, Tracey Sanderson, for her moral support
and good advice throughout this long adventure. She
never lost faith that we would finish this project. Thanks
also to Maria Murphy, who took over Tracey’s role as
we finished the book.
xi

© Cambridge University Press

www.cambridge.org

